<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE reference PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Reference//EN" "reference.dtd">
<reference id="pip-verification-command"> 
    <title>Pip Verification Commands</title>
    <shortdesc>This topic provides commands to verify if pip, the Python package manager, is correctly installed and up-to-date on your system.</shortdesc>
    
    <refbody>
        <section>
            <title>Overview</title>
            <p>Verifying pip installation is essential to ensure you can install and manage Python packages. The following table provides commands to check pip installation, version, and update status across different platforms.</p>
        </section>
        
        <section>
            <title>Pip Verification Commands</title>
            <simpletable>
                <sthead>
                    <stentry>Command</stentry>
                    <stentry>Description</stentry>
                    <stentry>Expected Output</stentry>
                </sthead>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>pip --version</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Checks if pip is installed and displays the installed version.</stentry>
                    <stentry>The pip version number, e.g., <codeph>pip 21.1.2</codeph></stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>python -m pip --version</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Alternative command to check pip version using Python.</stentry>
                    <stentry>The pip version number with Python version details.</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>pip list</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Lists all installed Python packages along with their versions.</stentry>
                    <stentry>A list of installed packages and their versions.</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>pip show [package]</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Displays detailed information about a specific package.</stentry>
                    <stentry>Package details including version, location, and dependencies.</stentry>
                </strow>
                <strow>
                    <stentry><codeph>pip install --upgrade pip</codeph></stentry>
                    <stentry>Updates pip to the latest version.</stentry>
                    <stentry>A success message confirming pip is upgraded.</stentry>
                </strow>
            </simpletable>
        </section>
        
        <section>
            <title>Troubleshooting Pip Installation</title>
            <p>If pip is not installed, you may see an error message indicating that the command was not found. In this case, follow the instructions below:</p>
            <ul>
                <li><b>Windows</b>: Download and install the latest version of Python from the official <xref href="https://www.python.org/downloads/" format="html" scope="external">Python website</xref>. Ensure that "Add Python to PATH" is selected during installation.</li>
                <li><b>macOS</b>: Install pip using <codeph>sudo easy_install pip</codeph> or by installing Python via <xref href="https://brew.sh/" format="html" scope="external">Homebrew</xref>.</li>
                <li><b>Linux</b>: Use the package manager for your distribution, e.g., <codeph>sudo apt install python3-pip</codeph> for Debian-based systems.</li>
            </ul>
        </section>

        <section>
            <title>Additional Resources</title>
            <p>For more information on pip commands, visit the <xref href="https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/" format="html" scope="external">official pip documentation</xref>.</p>
        </section>
    </refbody>
</reference>